[DOC] Added TraceQL draft doc (#1926)
grafana/tempo: docs/tempo/website/traceql/_index.md

### Attribute fields

Attribute fields are derived from the span and can be customized. Process and span attribute types are [defined by the attribute itself](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/b43e9b18b76abf3ee040164b55b9c355217151f3/opentelemetry/proto/common/v1/common.proto#L30-L38), whereas intrinsic fields have a built-in type. You can refer to dynamic attributes (also known as tags) on the span or the span's resource.

Attributes in a query start with a span or resource scope depending on what exactly you want to query. This provides significant performance benefits because it allows Tempo to only scan the data you are interested in. To find traces with the `GET HTTP` method, your query could look like this:

```
{ span.http.method = "GET" }
```

<p align="center"><img src="assets/span-resource-attributes.png" alt="Example of span resources and attributes" /></p>

#### Examples

Find traces that passed through the `prod` namespace:
```
{ resource.namespace = "prod" }
```

Find any database connection string that goes to a Postgres or MySQL database:
```
{ span.db.system =~ "postgresql|mysql" }
```

### Unscoped attribute fields

> Attributes can be unscoped if you are unsure if the requested attribute exists on the span or resource. When possible, use scoped  instead of unscoped attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attributes can be unscoped if you are unsure if the requested attribute exists on the span or resource. When possible, use scoped instead of unscoped attributes.
```

For example, to find traces with an attribute of `http.status` set to `200`:
```
{ http.status = 200 }
```

To find traces where the `namespace` is set to `prod`:
```
{ namespace = "prod" }
```

### Comparison operators

Comparison operators are used to test values within an expression.

The implemented comparison operators are:

- `=` (equality)
- `!=` (inequality)
- `>` (greater than)
- `>=` (greater than or equal to)
- `<` (less than)
- `<=` (less than or equal to)
- `=~` (regular expression)

For example, to find all traces where an `http.status` attribute in a span are greater than `400` but less than equal to `500`:

```
{ span.http.status >= 400 && span.http.status < 500 }
```

Find all traces where the `http.method` attribute is either `GET` or `DELETE`:

```
{ span.http.method =~ “DELETE|GET” }
```

### Field expressions

Fields can also be combined in various ways to allow more flexible search criteria. A field expression is a composite of multiple fields that define all of the criteria that must be matched to return results.

#### Examples

> Find traces with "success" `http status` codes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Find traces with "success" `http.status` codes:
```

```
{ span.http.status >= 200 && span.http.status < 300 }
```

Find traces where a `DELETE` HTTP method was used and the instrinsic span status was not OK:

```

> { span.http.method = "DELETE" && span.status != ok }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{ span.http.method = "DELETE" && status != ok }
```

```

Both expressions require all conditions to be true on the same span. The entire expression inside of a pair of `{}` must be evaluated as true on a single span for it to be included in the result set.

In the above example, if a span includes an `.http.method` attribute set to `DELETE` where the span also includes a `status` attribute set to `ok`, the trace would not be included in the returned results.

## Combining spansets

Spanset operators let you combine two sets of spans using and (`&&`) as well as union (`||`).

- `{condA} && {condB}`
- `{condA} || {condB}`

> For example, if you want to find a trace that went through two specific regions:

Author: ```suggestion
For example, to find a trace that went through two specific regions:
```

```
{ resource.region = "eu-west-0" } && { resource.region = "eu-west-1" }
```

> Note the difference between the above and the following:

Author: ```suggestion
Note the difference between the previous example and this one:
```

Attributes in a query start with a scope (see Scoped attribute fields section below). To find traces with the `GET HTTP` method, your query could look like this:

```
{ .http.method = "GET" }
```

Or like this:
```
{ .http.method ="GET"}
```

#### Examples

Find traces that passed through the prod namespace:
```
{ .namespace = "prod" }
```

Find any database connection string that goes to a Postgres or MySQL database:
```
{ .db.system =~ "postgresql|mysql" }
```

### Scoped attribute fields

Attributes can be specifically scoped to either "span" or "resource". Specifying "span" or "resource" can result in significant performance benefits because it reduces the amount of data that Tempo has to retrieve to answer your query.

For example, to find traces with a span attribute of `http.status` set to `200`:
```
{ span.http.status = 200 }
```

To find traces where a the resource `namespace` is set to `prod`:
```
{ resource.namespace = "prod" }
```

> <p align="center"><img src="assets/span-resource-attributes.png" alt="Example of span resources and attributes" /></p>

Author: This image shows a span resource query example, so I've moved it up to the Scoped section.

---
title: TraceQL
menuTitle: TraceQL
description: Learn about TraceQL, Tempo's query language for traces
weight: 450
aliases:
  - /docs/tempo/latest/traceql/
keywords:
  - Tempo query language
  - query language
  - TraceQL
---

# TraceQL

> Inspired by PromQL and LogQL, TraceQL is a query language designed for selecting traces in Tempo. Currently, TraceQL query can select traces based on the following see [future work](./architecture.md) for where the language is heading.

Reviewer: sentence seems odd. reword?

Author: Agreed. I'll rework that sentence.

> Inspired by PromQL and LogQL, TraceQL is a query language designed for selecting traces in Tempo. Currently, TraceQL query can select traces based on the following see [future work](./architecture.md) for where the language is heading.
> 
> - Span and resource attributes, timing, and duration
> - Basic aggregates: `count()` and `avg()`
> 

Author: ```suggestion
Inspired by PromQL and LogQL, TraceQL is a query language designed for selecting traces in Tempo. Currently, TraceQL query can select traces based on the following:

- Span and resource attributes, timing, and duration
- Basic aggregates: `count()` and `avg()`

For information on where the language is headed, see [future work](architecture).
```

> The TraceQL language uses similar syntax and semantics as [PromQL](https://grafana.com/blog/2020/02/04/introduction-to-promql-the-prometheus-query-language/) and [LogQL](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/logql/), where possible. TraceQL recognizes two types of data: intrinsics, which are fundamental to spans, and attributes, which are customizable key-value pairs.

Reviewer: > TraceQL recognizes two types of data: intrinsics, which are fundamental to spans, and attributes, which are customizable key-value pairs.

This sentence feels like it's in an awkward spot. Just remove?

Author: The sentence adds valuable information about attributes and intrinsics, which we have sections for below. I'll see about moving it to another section. Maybe it will fit better there.

Author: I moved the sentence down to the Construct a query section. What do you think?

Reviewer: yeah, agree it makes more sense down there.

TraceQL requires Tempo’s Parquet columnar format to be enabled. For information on enabling Parquet, refer to the [Apache Parquet backend](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/configuration/parquet/) Tempo documentation.

## TraceQL query editor

With Tempo 2.0, you can use the TraceQL query editor in the Tempo data source to build queries and drill-down into result sets. The editor is available in Grafana’s Explore interface. For more information, refer to [TraceQL query editor](query-editor.md).

<p align="center"><img src="../assets/query-editor-http-method.png" alt="Query editor showing request for http.method" /></p>

## Construct a TraceQL query

In TraceQL, a query is an expression that is evaluated on one trace at a time. The query is structured as a set of chained expressions (a pipeline). Each expression in the pipeline selects or discards spansets from being included in the results set. For example:

```
{ span.http.status_code >= 200 && span.http.status_code < 300 } | count() > 2
```

> <!--  jpe finish ... -->

Reviewer: jpe comment. i think it's referring to the below paragraph needing attention.

Author: yes, the explanation of what the query on line 37 does.

Reviewer: right, i just mean we should tighten up the description below and remove line 40.

In this case, the search looks for reduces traces to those spans that match the criteria `http.status_code` is in the range of `200` to `300`.  The returned spansets contain more than 2.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

TraceQL recognizes two types of data: intrinsics, which are fundamental to spans, and attributes, which are customizable key-value pairs. You can use intrinsics and attributes to refine queries. 

```

### Intrinsic fields

Intrinsic fields are fundamental to spans. These fields can be referenced when selecting spans. Note that custom attributes are prefixed with `.`, `span.` or `resource.` whereas intrinsics can be typed directly.

| **Operation** | **Type** | **Definition**                        | **Example**            |
|---------------|----------|---------------------------------------|------------------------|
| status        | string   | status values are error, ok, or unset | { status = ok }        |
| duration      | duration | end - start time of the span          | { duration > 100ms }   |
| name          | string   | operation or span name                | { name = "HTTP POST" } |

### Attribute fields

Attribute fields are derived from the span and can be customized. Process and span attribute types are [defined by the attribute itself](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/b43e9b18b76abf3ee040164b55b9c355217151f3/opentelemetry/proto/common/v1/common.proto#L30-L38), whereas intrinsic fields have a built-in type. You can refer to dynamic attributes (also known as tags) on the span or the span's resource.

> Attributes in a query start with a period and must end with a space. To find traces with the `GET HTTP` method, your query could look like this:

Reviewer: > Attributes in a query start with a period and must end with a space.
This is not true. I suppose attributes begin with a scope and let's not get into what they "must" end with. That's a whole thing.

Author: updated the sentence.

> Attributes in a query start with a period and must end with a space. To find traces with the `GET HTTP` method, your query could look like this:

Author: I updated the text for that sentence. Are there additional things that we should mention? It feels like adding something extra about what that scope looks like. For example: 
```suggestion
Attributes in a query start with a scope (see Scoped attribute fields section below). To find traces with the `GET HTTP` method, your query could look like this:
```

```
{ .http.method = "GET" }
```

Or like this:

```

> { .http.method ="GET"}

Reviewer: spacing

```

#### Examples

Find traces that passed through the prod namespace:

```
{ .namespace = "prod" }
```

Find any database connection string that goes to a Postgres or MySQL database:

```
{ .db.system =~ "postgresql|mysql" }
```

### Scoped attribute fields

Attributes can be specifically scoped to either "span" or "resource". Specifying "span" or "resource" can result in significant performance benefits because it reduces the amount of data that Tempo has to retrieve to answer your query.

> For example, to find traces with a span attribute of `http.status` set to `200`:
> { span.http.status = 200 }
> To find traces where a the resource `namespace` is set to `prod`:
> { resource.namespace = "prod" }
> 

Author: ```suggestion
For example, to find traces with a span attribute of `http.status` set to `200`:

```
{ span.http.status = 200 }
```

To find traces where a the resource `namespace` is set to `prod`:

```
{ resource.namespace = "prod" }
```

```

In the above example, if a span includes an `.http.method` attribute set to `DELETE` where the span also includes a `status` attribute set to `ok`, the trace would not be included in the returned results.

## Combining spansets

Spanset operators let you combine two sets of spans using and (`&&`) as well as union (`||`).

- `{condA} && {condB}`
- `{condA} || {condB}`

For example, if you want to find a trace that went through two specific regions:

```
{ .region = "eu-west-0" } && { .region = "eu-west-1" }
```

Note the difference between the above and the following:

```
{ .region = "eu-west-0" && .region = "eu-west-1" }
```

The second expression returns no traces because it's impossible for a single span to have a `.region` attribute that is set to both region values at the same time.

## Aggregators

So far, all of the example queries expressions have been about individual spans. You can use aggregate functions to ask questions about a set of spans. These currently consist of:

- `count` - The total count across a given intrinsic or items.
- `avg` - The average across a given intrinsic or items.

> Aggregate functions allow you to carry out operations on matching results to further refine the traces returned. <jpe> More aggregations are planned in the future <jpe link to future doc>

Reviewer: jpe notes: link to the doc with future ideas

Author: Is this the correct link?

Reviewer: i think so?

Author: We moved the previous future section to the architecture ("how it works") page. The suggestion below updates the text from line 193 with this information.

---
title: TraceQL
menuTitle: TraceQL
description: Learn about TraceQL, Tempo's query language for traces
weight: 450
aliases:
  - /docs/tempo/latest/traceql/
keywords:
  - Tempo query language
  - query language
  - TraceQL
---

# TraceQL

Inspired by PromQL and LogQL, TraceQL is a query language designed for selecting traces in Tempo. Currently, TraceQL query can select traces based on the following:

- Span and resource attributes, timing, and duration
- Basic aggregates: `count()` and `avg()`

For information on where the language is headed, see [future work](architecture).

> The TraceQL language uses similar syntax and semantics as [PromQL](https://grafana.com/blog/2020/02/04/introduction-to-promql-the-prometheus-query-language/) and [LogQL](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/logql/), where possible. TraceQL recognizes two types of data: intrinsics, which are fundamental to spans, and attributes, which are customizable key-value pairs.

Author: ```suggestion
The TraceQL language uses similar syntax and semantics as [PromQL](https://grafana.com/blog/2020/02/04/introduction-to-promql-the-prometheus-query-language/) and [LogQL](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/logql/), where possible. 
```

TraceQL requires Tempo’s Parquet columnar format to be enabled. For information on enabling Parquet, refer to the [Apache Parquet backend](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/configuration/parquet/) Tempo documentation.

## TraceQL query editor

With Tempo 2.0, you can use the TraceQL query editor in the Tempo data source to build queries and drill-down into result sets. The editor is available in Grafana’s Explore interface. For more information, refer to [TraceQL query editor](query-editor.md).

<p align="center"><img src="assets/query-editor-http-method.png" alt="Query editor showing request for http.method" /></p>

## Construct a TraceQL query

In TraceQL, a query is an expression that is evaluated on one trace at a time. The query is structured as a set of chained expressions (a pipeline). Each expression in the pipeline selects or discards spansets from being included in the results set. For example:

```
{ span.http.status_code >= 200 && span.http.status_code < 300 } | count() > 2
```

> <!--  jpe finish ... -->

Author: ```suggestion
```

> In this case, the search reduces traces to those spans that match the criteria `http.status_code` is in the range of `200` to `300`.  The returned spansets contain more than 2.

Author: ```suggestion
In this case, the search reduces traces to those spans where criteria `http.status_code` is in the range of `200` to `300` and the number of spans within a trace is greater than two. 
```

Author: @joe-elliott  Is this correct?

Reviewer 2: Yep, this is correct except it's between 200 and 299.

Queries select sets of spans and filter them through a pipeline of aggregators and conditions. If a spanset is produced after evaluation on a trace, then this spanset (and by extension the trace) is included in the result set of the query.

## Selecting spans

> TraceQL recognizes two types of data: intrinsics, which are fundamental to spans, and attributes, which are customizable key-value pairs. You can use intrinsics and attributes to refine queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TraceQL differentiates between two types of span data: intrinsics, which are fundamental to spans, and attributes, which are customizable key-value pairs. You can use intrinsics and attributes to build filters and select spans.
```

In the above example, if a span includes an `.http.method` attribute set to `DELETE` where the span also includes a `status` attribute set to `ok`, the trace would not be included in the returned results.

## Combining spansets

Spanset operators let you combine two sets of spans using and (`&&`) as well as union (`||`).

- `{condA} && {condB}`
- `{condA} || {condB}`

For example, if you want to find a trace that went through two specific regions:

```
{ .region = "eu-west-0" } && { .region = "eu-west-1" }
```

Note the difference between the above and the following:

```
{ .region = "eu-west-0" && .region = "eu-west-1" }
```

The second expression returns no traces because it's impossible for a single span to have a `.region` attribute that is set to both region values at the same time.

## Aggregators

So far, all of the example queries expressions have been about individual spans. You can use aggregate functions to ask questions about a set of spans. These currently consist of:

- `count` - The total count across a given intrinsic or items.
- `avg` - The average across a given intrinsic or items.

> Aggregate functions allow you to carry out operations on matching results to further refine the traces returned. <jpe> More aggregations are planned in the future <jpe link to future doc>

Author: ```suggestion
Aggregate functions allow you to carry out operations on matching results to further refine the traces returned. For more information on planned future work, refer to [How TraceQL works](architecture).
```

TraceQL requires Tempo’s Parquet columnar format to be enabled. For information on enabling Parquet, refer to the [Apache Parquet backend](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/configuration/parquet/) Tempo documentation.

## TraceQL query editor

With Tempo 2.0, you can use the TraceQL query editor in the Tempo data source to build queries and drill-down into result sets. The editor is available in Grafana’s Explore interface. For more information, refer to [TraceQL query editor](query-editor.md).

<p align="center"><img src="assets/query-editor-http-method.png" alt="Query editor showing request for http.method" /></p>

## Construct a TraceQL query

In TraceQL, a query is an expression that is evaluated on one trace at a time. The query is structured as a set of chained expressions (a pipeline). Each expression in the pipeline selects or discards spansets from being included in the results set. For example:

```
{ span.http.status_code >= 200 && span.http.status_code < 300 } | count() > 2
```

> In this example, the search reduces traces to those spans where: 

Author: ```suggestion
In this example, the search reduces traces to those spans where: 

```

## TraceQL query editor

With Tempo 2.0, you can use the TraceQL query editor in the Tempo data source to build queries and drill-down into result sets. The editor is available in Grafana’s Explore interface. For more information, refer to [TraceQL query editor](query-editor.md).

<p align="center"><img src="assets/query-editor-http-method.png" alt="Query editor showing request for http.method" /></p>

## Construct a TraceQL query

In TraceQL, a query is an expression that is evaluated on one trace at a time. The query is structured as a set of chained expressions (a pipeline). Each expression in the pipeline selects or discards spansets from being included in the results set. For example:

```
{ span.http.status_code >= 200 && span.http.status_code < 300 } | count() > 2
```

In this example, the search reduces traces to those spans where: 

* `http.status_code` is in the range of `200` to `299` and 
* the number of matching spans within a trace is greater than two. 

> Queries select sets of spans and filter them through a pipeline of aggregators and conditions. If a spanset is produced after evaluation on a trace, then this spanset (and by extension the trace) is included in the result set of the query.

Author: That is indeed clearer. I'll make the change for the content. 
```suggestion
Queries select sets of spans and filter them through a pipeline of aggregators and conditions. If, for a given trace, this pipeline produces a spanset then it is included in the results of the query.
```

## Selecting spans

TraceQL differentiates between two types of span data: intrinsics, which are fundamental to spans, and attributes, which are customizable key-value pairs. You can use intrinsics and attributes to build filters and select spans.

In TraceQL, curly brackets `{}` always select a set of spans from the current trace. They are commonly paired with a condition to reduce the spans being passed in.

> This simple query will be evaluated on every span of every trace, one at a time.

Reviewer: I think we should remove lines 54 -> 61. It's redundant with information above and below.

Author: Will do. Thank you for the suggestion.

> This simple query will be evaluated on every span of every trace, one at a time.
> ```
> { .http.status = 200 }
> ```
> 
> If the trace being evaluated contains no spans with an attribute `http.status` with the value `200`, then no spans will be selected and this trace will not appear in the result set.
> 
> If the trace does contain spans with an attribute `http.status` with the value `200`, then only those spans will be returned. The trace is reduced to only the set of spans that match the condition inside the `{}`. The result set will contain only this subset of spans matching the condition.

Author: ```suggestion
```

### Intrinsic fields

> Intrinsic fields are fundamental to spans. These fields can be referenced when selecting spans. Note that custom attributes are prefixed with `.`, `span.` or `resource.` whereas intrinsics can be typed directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Intrinsic fields are fundamental to spans. These fields can be referenced when selecting spans. Note that custom attributes are prefixed with `.`, `span.` or `resource.` whereas intrinsics are typed directly.
```

| **Operation** | **Type** | **Definition**                        | **Example**            |
|---------------|----------|---------------------------------------|------------------------|
| status        | string   | status values are error, ok, or unset | { status = ok }        |
| duration      | duration | end - start time of the span          | { duration > 100ms }   |
| name          | string   | operation or span name                | { name = "HTTP POST" } |

### Attribute fields

Attribute fields are derived from the span and can be customized. Process and span attribute types are [defined by the attribute itself](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/b43e9b18b76abf3ee040164b55b9c355217151f3/opentelemetry/proto/common/v1/common.proto#L30-L38), whereas intrinsic fields have a built-in type. You can refer to dynamic attributes (also known as tags) on the span or the span's resource.

> Attributes in a query start with a scope (see Scoped attribute fields section below). To find traces with the `GET HTTP` method, your query could look like this:

Reviewer: I think we should reverse the order we are presenting these. Show scoped first and then unscoped. We want people to think about scoped first and prefer scoped to improve performance.  To do this I think we should do the following:

Line 78: Change "Attributes in a query start with a scope (see Scoped attribute fields section below)." to "Attributes in a query start with a span or resource scope depending on what exactly you want to query. This provides significant performance benefits because it allows Tempo to only scan the data you are interested in." 

Line 81: Change to: "{ span.http.method = "GET" }"

Line 93: Change to: "{ resource.namespace = "prod" }"

Line 98: Change to: "{ span.db.system =~ "postgresql|mysql" }"

Author: Done.

```
{ .http.method = "GET" }
```

> Or like this:

Reviewer: I think we should remove this example. (Lines 84-> 87)

Author: Done.

```
{ .http.method ="GET"}
```

#### Examples

Find traces that passed through the prod namespace:
```
{ .namespace = "prod" }
```

Find any database connection string that goes to a Postgres or MySQL database:
```
{ .db.system =~ "postgresql|mysql" }
```

> ### Scoped attribute fields

Reviewer: Change to "Unscoped attribute fields"

Author: Done.

> Attributes can be specifically scoped to either "span" or "resource". Specifying "span" or "resource" can result in significant performance benefits because it reduces the amount of data that Tempo has to retrieve to answer your query.

Reviewer: Attributes can be unscoped if you are unsure if the requested attribute exists on the span or resource. It is encouraged to use scoped attributes as much as possible.

Author: Done.

> For example, to find traces with a span attribute of `http.status` set to `200`:

Reviewer: Adjust below examples to remove "span" and "resource"

```
{ span.http.status = 200 }
```

To find traces where a the resource `namespace` is set to `prod`:
```
{ resource.namespace = "prod" }
```

<p align="center"><img src="assets/span-resource-attributes.png" alt="Example of span resources and attributes" /></p>

### Comparison operators

Comparison operators are used to test values within an expression.

The implemented comparison operators are:

- `=` (equality)
- `!=` (inequality)
- `>` (greater than)
- `>=` (greater than or equal to)
- `<` (less than)
- `<=` (less than or equal to)
- `=~` (regular expression)

For example, to find all traces where an `http.status` attribute in a span are greater than `400` but less than equal to `500`:

```

> { .http.status >= 400 && .http.status < 500 }

Reviewer: add span scopes here.

Author: Done.

```

Find all traces where the `http.method` attribute is either `GET` or `DELETE`:

```

> { .http.method =~ “DELETE|GET” }

Reviewer: add span scope here

Author: Done.

```

### Field expressions

Fields can also be combined in various ways to allow more flexible search criteria. A field expression is a composite of multiple fields that define all of the criteria that must be matched to return results.

#### Examples

Find traces with "success" http status codes:

```

> { .http.status >= 200 && .http.status < 300 }

Reviewer: add span scope

```

Find traces where a `DELETE` HTTP method was used and the instrinsic span status was not OK:

```

> { .http.method = "DELETE" && status != ok }

Reviewer: add span scope

```

Both expressions require all conditions to be true on the same span. The entire expression inside of a pair of `{}` must be evaluated as true on a single span for it to be included in the result set.

In the above example, if a span includes an `.http.method` attribute set to `DELETE` where the span also includes a `status` attribute set to `ok`, the trace would not be included in the returned results.

## Combining spansets

Spanset operators let you combine two sets of spans using and (`&&`) as well as union (`||`).

- `{condA} && {condB}`
- `{condA} || {condB}`

For example, if you want to find a trace that went through two specific regions:

```

> { .region = "eu-west-0" } && { .region = "eu-west-1" }

Reviewer: add resource scope

```

Note the difference between the above and the following:

```

> { .region = "eu-west-0" && .region = "eu-west-1" }

Reviewer: add resource scope

```

> The second expression returns no traces because it's impossible for a single span to have a `.region` attribute that is set to both region values at the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second expression returns no traces because it's impossible for a single span to have a  `resource.region` attribute that is set to both region values at the same time.
```

## Aggregators

So far, all of the example queries expressions have been about individual spans. You can use aggregate functions to ask questions about a set of spans. These currently consist of:

> - `count` - The total count across a given intrinsic or items.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `count` - The count of spans in the spanset.
```

> - `avg` - The average across a given intrinsic or items.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `avg` - The average of a given attribute or intrinsic for a spanset.
```

Aggregate functions allow you to carry out operations on matching results to further refine the traces returned. For more information on planned future work, refer to [How TraceQL works]({{< relref "architecture" >}}).

For example, to find traces where the total number of spans is greater than `10`:

```
count() > 10
```

Find traces where the average duration of the spans in a trace is greater than `20ms`:

```
avg(duration) > 20ms
```

For example, find traces that have more than 3 spans with an attribute `http.status` with a value of `200`:

```

> { .http.status = 200 } | count() > 3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{ span.http.status = 200 } | count() > 3
```

```

## Examples

Find any trace with a span attribute or resource attribute `namespace` set to `prod`:

```
{ .namespace = "prod" }
```

> Find any trace with a span attribute `namespace` set to `prod`:

Reviewer: change lines 223 and 226 to be have the resource scope instead of the span scope. it makes more sense.

Author: Done.

```
{ span.namespace = "prod" }
```

Find any trace with a `namespace` attribute set to `prod` and `http.status` attribute set to `200`:

```
{ .namespace = "prod" && .http.status = 200 }
```

Find any trace where spans within it have a `namespace` attribute set to `prod` and an `http.status` attribute set to `200`. In previous examples, all conditions had to be true on one span. These conditions can be true on either different spans or the same spans.

```
{ .namespace = "prod" } && { .http.status = 200 }
```

Find any trace where any span has an `http.method` attribute set to `GET` as well as a `status` attribute set to `ok`, where any other span also exists that has an `http.method` attribute set to `DELETE`, but does not have a `status` attribute set to `ok`:

```
{ .http.method = "GET" && status = ok } && { .http.method = "DELETE" && status != ok }
```

Find any trace where the average client-span duration in a trace exceeds a threshold of one second:

```

> { span.kind = "client" } | avg(duration) > 1s

Reviewer: this may be a miss but i don't think traceql can currently query the span kind intrinsic. let's remove this example.

Author: Done.

```
{ span.http.status_code >= 200 && span.http.status_code < 300 } | count() > 2
```

<!--  jpe finish ... -->
In this case, the search reduces traces to those spans that match the criteria `http.status_code` is in the range of `200` to `300`.  The returned spansets contain more than 2.

Queries select sets of spans and filter them through a pipeline of aggregators and conditions. If a spanset is produced after evaluation on a trace, then this spanset (and by extension the trace) is included in the result set of the query.

## Selecting spans

TraceQL recognizes two types of data: intrinsics, which are fundamental to spans, and attributes, which are customizable key-value pairs. You can use intrinsics and attributes to refine queries.

In TraceQL, curly brackets `{}` always select a set of spans from the current trace. They are commonly paired with a condition to reduce the spans being passed in.

This simple query will be evaluated on every span of every trace, one at a time.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

| **Operation** | **Type** | **Definition**                        | **Example**            |
|---------------|----------|---------------------------------------|------------------------|
| status        | string   | status values are error, ok, or unset | { status = ok }        |
| duration      | duration | end - start time of the span          | { duration > 100ms }   |
| name          | string   | operation or span name                | { name = "HTTP POST" } |

### Attribute fields

Attribute fields are derived from the span and can be customized. Process and span attribute types are [defined by the attribute itself](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/b43e9b18b76abf3ee040164b55b9c355217151f3/opentelemetry/proto/common/v1/common.proto#L30-L38), whereas intrinsic fields have a built-in type. You can refer to dynamic attributes (also known as tags) on the span or the span's resource.

Attributes in a query start with a scope (see Scoped attribute fields section below). To find traces with the `GET HTTP` method, your query could look like this:

```
{ .http.method = "GET" }
```

Or like this:

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

```
{ .http.method ="GET"}
```

#### Examples

Find traces that passed through the prod namespace:

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

```
{ .namespace = "prod" }
```

Find any database connection string that goes to a Postgres or MySQL database:

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

---
title: TraceQL
menuTitle: TraceQL

> description: Learn about TraceQL, the query language for traces

Reviewer: alternative (no strong feelings):

Learn about TraceQL, Tempo's query language for traces

Author: Done.

weight: 450
aliases:
  - /docs/tempo/latest/traceql/
keywords:

>   - tempo query language

Author: ```suggestion
  - Tempo query language
```

  - query language
  - TraceQL
---

# TraceQL

Inspired by PromQL and LogQL, TraceQL is a query language designed for selecting traces in Tempo. A TraceQL query can select traces based on:

- Span and resource attributes, timing, and duration

> - Structural relationships between spans

Reviewer: Currently TraceQL can do:

- Span and resource attributes, timing, and duration
- Basic aggregates: `count()` and `avg()`

I think the document should be focused on these features. We can add a section for "planned functionality" and include details there.

Author: Based upon your comment, shoudl we remove the current bullets and replace them with the two you listed? Are structural relationships between spans and aggregated data from the spans in planned functionality category?

- Aggregated data from the spans in a trace

The TraceQL language uses similar syntax and semantics as [PromQL](https://grafana.com/blog/2020/02/04/introduction-to-promql-the-prometheus-query-language/) and [LogQL](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/logql/), where possible. TraceQL recognizes two types of data: intrinsics, which are fundamental to spans, and attributes, which are customizable key-value pairs.

TraceQL requires Tempo’s Parquet columnar format to be enabled. For information on enabling Parquet, refer to the [Apache Parquet backend](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/configuration/parquet/) Tempo documentation.

## How does it work?

> The TraceQL engine connects the Tempo API handler with the storage layer. The TraceQL engine:

Reviewer: Personally this is too "deep dive" to me. I think this document should be impactful for immediately getting people starting writing TraceQL.

Author: I'm going to move this section to its own page

- Parses incoming requests and extract flattened conditions the storage layer can work with
- Pulls spansets from the storage layer and revalidates that the query matches each span
- Returns the search response

The default Tempo search reviews the whole trace. TraceQL provides a method for formulating precise queries so you can zoom in to the data you need. Query results are returned faster because the queries limit what is searched.

For an indepth look at TraceQL, read the [TraceQL: A first-of-its-kind query language to accelerate trace analysis in Tempo 2.0"](https://grafana.com/blog/2022/11/30/traceql-a-first-of-its-kind-query-language-to-accelerate-trace-analysis-in-tempo-2.0/) blog post by Trevor Jones.

For examples of query syntax, refer to [Perform a query]({{<relref "construct-query">}}).

> {{< vimeo 773194063 >}}

Reviewer: i feel like this video will become stale fast.

Author: I moved this section to the architecture page, so it's available but not in the way. We can remove it or update it as we need to.

## Active development and limitations

> TraceQL is actively being developed. At this time, it is not production-ready.

Reviewer: Similar to the above. Let's focus on what TraceQL can do and then maybe at the end we can list future plans or link to a roadmap or something.

Also, unless @mdisibio disagrees I think we should call TraceQL GA with the 2.0 release.

Author: In light of this, I removed the above sentence. This section is also now on the architecture (How it works) page.

TraceQL will be implemented in phases. The initial iteration of the TraceQL engine includes spanset selection and pipelines.

For more information about TraceQL’s design, refer to the [TraceQL Concepts design proposal](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/blob/main/docs/design-proposals/2022-04%20TraceQL%20Concepts.md).

### Known limitations

> - Arithmetics are not implemented yet

Reviewer: Same as above, let's focus on what TraceQL can do. I think this doc should primarily be a set of examples that shows the capabilities of the language and gets people quickly started.

Author: Okay, making those changes.

Author: I moved the construct-query page content to the index.md file. The architecture section is now on it's own page and the query editor has it's own page as well.
